---
layout: post
title: "Project Phase 4"
comments: true
date:   2018-10-08 11:58:00 -0600
category: proyectos
numero: 4
descripcion: >
 Instrucciones para la fase 4 (Code Generation) del compilador de COOL.
---
# Programming Assignment IV

## 1. Introduction
In this assignment, you will implement a code generator for Cool. When successfully completed, you will have a fully functional Cool compiler!

The code generator makes use of the AST constructed in PA3 and static analysis performed in PA4. Your code generator should produce MIPS assembly code that faithfully implements any correct Cool program.

There is no error recovery in code generation—all erroneous Cool programs have been detected by the front-end phases of the compiler.

As with the static analysis assignment, this assignment has considerable room for design decisions. Your program is correct if the code it generates works correctly; how you achieve that goal is up to you. We will suggest certain conventions that we believe will make your life easier, but you do not have to take our advice. This assignment is about twice the amount of the code of the previous programming assignment, though they share much of the same infrastructure. **Start early!**

Critical to getting a correct code generator is a thorough understanding of both the expected behavior of Cool constructs and the interface between the runtime system and the generated code. The expected behavior of Cool programs is defined by the operational semantics for Cool given in Section 13 of the _Cool Reference Manual_. Recall that this is only a specification of the meaning of the language constructs—not how to implement them. The interface between the runtime system and the generated code is given in _The Cool Runtime System_. See that document for a detailed discussion of the requirements of the runtime system on the generated code. There is a lot of information in this handout and the aforementioned documents, and you need to know most of it to write a correct code generator. _Please read thoroughly_. You must work individually on this assignment (no collaboration in groups).

## 2. Files and Directories

To get started, create a directory where you want to do the assignment and execute one of the following commands in that directory. If you are using java run this command to get the initial skeleton:

```
make -f /usr/class/cs143/assignments/PA5J/Makefile
```

(notice the “J” in the path name).
As usual, there are other files used in the assignment that are symbolically linked to your directory or are included from `/usr/class/cs143/include` and `/usr/class/cs143/src`. You should not modify these files.

You will need to make a change before the code will compile. A few changes need to be made in the files `ASTParser.java` and `ClassTable.java` (which you should not otherwise modify); in particular, every instance of the class name "formalc" needs to be replaced by "formal", every instance of "class_c" needs to be replaced by "class_", and every instance of "programc" needs to be replaced by "program". Running the following command in the assignment directory will make these changes automatically:

```
perl -p -i.bak -e "s/formalc/formal/g;s/class_c/class_/g;s/programc/program/g" ASTParser.java ClassTable.java
```

Almost all of these files have been described in previous assignments.

This is a list of the files that you may want to modify. You should already be familiar with most of the other files from previous assignment. **See the README file for details about the additional files.**

* `CgenClassTable.java` and `CgenNode.java`: These files provide an implementation of the inheritance graph for the code generator. You will need to complete `CgenClassTable` in order to build your code generator. You can use the provided code or replace it with your own inheritance graph from PA4.

* `StringSymbol.java`, `IntSymbol.java`, and `BoolConst.java` : These files provide support for Cool constants. You will need to complete the method for generating constant definitions.

* `cool-tree.java` : This file contains the definitions for the AST nodes. You will need to add code generation routines `code(PrintStream)` for Cool expressions in this file. **The code generator is invoked by calling method `cgen(PrintStream)` of class program.** You may add new methods, but do not modify the existing declarations.

* `TreeConstants.java`: As before, this file defines some useful symbol constants. Feel free to add your own as you see fit.

* `CgenSupport.java`: This file contains general support code for the code generator. You will find a number of handy functions here including ones for emitting MIPS instructions. Add to the file as you see fit, but don’t change anything that’s already there.

* `example.cl` Feel free to modify this file to test your code generator.

* `README`: This file will contain the write-up for your assignment. It is critical that you explain design decisions, how your code is structured, and why you believe your design is a good one (i.e., why it leads to a correct and robust program). It is part of the assignment to explain things in text as well as to comment your code.


## 3. Design
Before continuing, we suggest you read The Cool Runtime System to familiarize yourself with the requirements on your code generator imposed by the runtime system.
In considering your design, at a high-level, your code generator will need to perform the following tasks:

1. Determine and emit code for global constants, such as prototype objects.
2. Determine and emit code for global tables, such as the `class_nameTab`, the `class_objTab`, and the dispatch tables.
3. Determine and emit code for the initialization method of each class.
4. Determine and emit code for each method definition.


There are many possible ways to write the code generator. One reasonable strategy is to perform code generation in two passes. The first pass decides the object layout for each class, particularly the offset at which each attribute is stored in an object. Using this information, the second pass recursively walks each feature and generates stack machine code for each expression.

There are a number of things you must keep in mind while designing your code generator:

* Your code generator must work correctly with the Cool runtime system, which is explained in the _Cool Runtime System manual_.
* You should have a clear picture of the runtime semantics of Cool programs. The semantics are described informally in the first part of the _Cool Reference Manual_, and a precise description of how Cool programs should behave is given in Section 13 of the manual.
* You should understand the MIPS instruction set. An overview of MIPS operations is given in the `spim` documentation, which is on the class web page.
* You should decide what invariants your generated code will observe and expect (i.e., what registers will be saved, which might be overwritten, etc). You may also find it useful to refer to information on code generation in the lecture notes.

**You do not need to generate the same code as `coolc`**. `coolc` includes a very simple register allocator and other small changes that are not required for this assignment. The only requirement is to generate code that runs correctly with the runtime system.

### 3.1 Runtime Error Checking

The end of the Cool manual lists six errors that will terminate the program. Of these, your generated code should catch the first three—dispatch on void, case on void, and missing branch—and print a suitable error message before aborting. You may allow SPIM to catch division by zero. Catching the last two errors—substring out of range and heap overflow—is the responsibility of the runtime system in trap.handler. See Figure 4 of the Cool Runtime System manual for a listing of functions that display error messages for you.

### 3.2 Garbage Collection

To receive full credit for this assignment, your code generator must work correctly with the generational garbage collector in the Cool runtime system. The skeletons contain functions CgenClassTable.codeSelectGc (Java) that generate code that sets GC options from command line flags. The command-line flags that affect garbage collection are -g, -t, and -T. Garbage collection is disabled by default; the flag -g enables it. When enabled, the garbage collector not only reclaims memory, but also verifies that “-1” separates all objects in the heap, thus checking that the program (or the collector!) has not accidentally overwritten the end of an object. The -t and -T flags are used for additional testing. With -t the collector performs collections very frequently (on every allocation). The garbage collector does not directly use -T; in coolc the -T option causes extra code to be generated that performs more runtime validity checks. You are free to use (or not use) -T for whatever you wish.
For your implementation, the simplest way to start is to not use the collector at all (this is the default). When you decide to use the collector, be sure to carefully review the garbage collection interface described in the Cool Runtime System manual. Ensuring that your code generator correctly works with the garbage collector in all circumstances is not trivial.

## 4. Testing and Debugging
You will need a working scanner, parser, and semantic analyzer to test your code generator. You may use either your own components or the components from coolc. By default, the coolc components are used. To change that, replace the lexer, parser, and/or semant executable (which are symbolic links in your project directory) with your own scanner/parser/semantic analyzer. Even if you use your own components, it is wise to test your code generator with the coolc scanner, parser, and semantic analyzer at least once because we will grade your project using coolc’s version of the other phases.
You will run your code generator using mycoolc, a shell script that “glues” together the code generator with the rest of the compiler phases. Note that mycoolc takes a -c flag for debugging the code generator; using this flag merely causes cgen debug (a static field of class Flags in the Java version) to be set. Adding the actual code to produce useful debugging information is up to you. See the project README for details.

### 4.1 Coolaid
The Cool Runtime System manual mentions Coolaid, which is a tool used to verify some properties of the MIPS assembly code produced by a Cool code generator. In order to do this, Coolaid imposes additional restrictions on the assembly code beyond those required by the runtime system. Coolaid is not supported by the course staff and is not necessary for the project, so any Coolaid-specific restrictions listed in the Cool Runtime System manual may be safely ignored. Even without using Coolaid, however, you may find these additional restrictions helpful when deciding how to structure your assembly code.


### 4.2 Spim and XSpim

The executables spim and xspim are simulators for MIPS architecture on which you can run your generated code. The program xspim works like spim in that it lets you run MIPS assembly programs. However, it has many features that allow you to examine the virtual machine’s state, including the memory locations, registers, data segment, and code segment of the program. You can also set breakpoints and single step your program. The documentation for spim/xspim is on the course web page.


**Warning.** One thing that makes debugging with spim difficult is that spim is an interpreter for assembly code and not a true assembler. If your code or data definitions refer to undefined labels, the error shows up only if the executing code actually refers to such a label. Moreover, an error is reported only for undefined labels that appear in the code section of your program. If you have constant data definitions that refer to undefined labels, spim won’t tell you anything. It will just assume the value 0 for such undefined labels.

## 5. Autograding
You should download the script in the same folder where you executed the make command:
```shell
wget http://raw.githubusercontent.com/CC-4/cc-4.github.io/master/proyectos/scripts/pa4-grading.pl
chmod +x pa4-grading.pl

# if you want to grade using your phase 1
wget http://raw.githubusercontent.com/CC-4/cc-4.github.io/master/proyectos/scripts/pa4-grading-all.sh
chmod +x pa4-grading-all.sh
```

Every time you want to execute the autograder you should use:
```shell
./pa4-grading.pl

# if you want to grade using your phase 1
./pa4-grading-all.sh
```

## Documents
* [The Tree package Javadoc](http://web.stanford.edu/class/cs143/javadoc/cool_ast/)
* [The Cool Reference Manual](http://web.stanford.edu/class/cs143/materials/cool-manual.pdf)
* [The Cool Runtime System](http://web.stanford.edu/class/cs143/materials/cool-runtime.pdf)
* [Tour of the Cool Support Code](http://web.stanford.edu/class/cs143/materials/cool-tour.pdf)
* [SPIM Manual](http://web.stanford.edu/class/cs143/materials/SPIM_Manual.pdf)
* [Documento auxiliar para Cgen(esp)](https://github.com/CC-4/cc-4.github.io/raw/master/proyectos/doc%20auxiliar%20para%20cgen.pdf)
